
CSE 156 Natural Language Processing 
1 - Course Introduction 
Instructor Lianhui Qin 
Slides adapted from Yejin Choi 
1

CSE 156 Natural Language Processing 
1 - Course Introduction 
Instructor Lianhui Qin 
Slides adapted from Yejin Choi 
2
Whats NLP? 

 Fundamental goal deep understand of broad language 
 Not just string processing or keyword matching 
 End systems that we want to build 
 Simple spelling correction, text categorization 
 Complex speech recognition, machine translation, information extraction, sentiment analysis,  question answering 
 Unknown human-level comprehension is this just NLP? 
3
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
In Classical NLP Course 
 Text classification 
 Statistical language models 
 Representational learning 
 Word embeddings word2vec 
 Machine Translation 
 Seq2seq 
 Sequence Labeling 
 Conditional Random Field CRF 
4
 Morphology  Syntax 
 Semantics  Pragmatics  Parsing 
 Tagging 
 CNNs, LSTMs   
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
This Course
 Text classification 
 Statistical language models 
 Representational learning 
 Word embeddings word2vec 
 Machine Translation 
 Seq2seq 
 Sequence Labeling 
 Conditional Random Field CRF 5 
 Morphology  Syntax 
 Semantics  Pragmatics  Parsing 
 Tagging 
 CNNs, LSTMs  Transformer   
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
This Course 
What Youll Learn 
 The evolution of NLP from simple models to cutting-edge LLMs. 
 Core techniques tokenization, embeddings, transformers, and beyond. 
 Applications and challenges in real-world NLP. 
How Well Learn 
 Lectures, hands-on coding, and thought-provoking discussions. 
 Guest lectures from leading researchers in the field. 
 A mix of theory, implementation, and insights into current trends. 
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 6 Lecture 1 Introduction
What this  
class will look  like  
warning  
 the schedule is  tentative and  
subject to change 
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 7 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Large Language Model 
 How they are built 
 How LLMs reason 
 How to align with human 
 What limitations 
8
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Large Language Model How they are built 
 How LLMs reason 
 How to align with human  What limitations 

Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 9 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Large Language Model
 How they are built 
 How LLMs reason  How to align with human 
 What limitations 
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 10 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Large Language Model How they are built 
 How LLMs reason 
 How to align with human  What limitations 
Safety? Privacy? Trustworthy? 11 
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Agenda 
 Instructor and TAs 
 Course Logistic  QA 
 Course Introduction  QA 
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 12 Lecture 1 Introduction
Office Hours 
Most up-to-date TA office hour schedules and locations can  be found on the course website httpslianhui.ucsd.edu cse156.html 
13
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Course Logistics 
 Lecture TuTh 1230pm-150pm Center Hall 214  Discussion Friday 1200pm - 1250pm Center Hall 216  Office hours Please check details on the course website  Course Website httpslianhui.ucsd.educse156.html  Communication, QA via Piazza 
 All write-ups should be submitted via Gradescope Statistical NLP - CSE 156 14
Grading 
 50 Assignments 
 40 Course Project 
 10 Participation 
 10 Course Participation  Attendance 
 3 Extra Credit Discussion Section Attendance Statistical NLP - CSE 156 15
Assignments 
 4 assignments in total 50 of your total grades 
 First assignment will be released on Tuesday of week 2 tentative.  You have roughly 2 weeks to complete each assignment. 
 2 penalty-free late days at most 1 per assignment, then -10 per day.   Submitted on Gradescope instructions will be released with A1 
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 16
Assignments - Grades 
 4 assignments in total 50 of your total grades  Your higher scoring assignments have higher weights. 
Assignment Weight Your best 20 Your 2nd best 15 Your 3rd best 10 Your 4th best 5 
Example John Doe scores 70, 90, 80, 95 on the  four assignments, his assignment grade will be 
95  20  90  15  80  10  70  5  44 out of 50 pts
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 17 
Assignments - Format 
 Each assignment has both written and programming components  Written Questions 
 Must be typed. LaTex templates will be provided, but feel free to use alternatives  e.g., Word as long as your reports are clear and easy to read. 
We expect your responses to have  roughly the same formatting as the  provided instructions. 
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 18 
Assignments - Format 
 Each assignment has both written and programming components  Programming Questions 
 Implementing algorithms in Python on Google Colab  We'll provide starter code, but familiarity with Python is required. 
 We'll try to autograde programming assignments. Statistical NLP - CSE 156 19

Collaboration Policy 
 Each student is expected to submit their individual assignment. 
 You are encouraged to work in groups for your assignments, but you're expected to  acknowledge the names of collaborators along with a short description of the types  of collaborations being done, at the beginning of each assignment submission. 
 Once the discussion is done, you're expected to write up your assignment by  yourself. It's NOT allowed to complete the write-up of your assignment while  discussing with people note-taking is ok. 
 Copying or paraphrasing someone's work code included or permitting your own  work to be copied or paraphrased, even if only in part, is forbidden and will result in a  zero grade for the entire assignment in which the copying or paraphrasing was done. 
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 20
Discussion Session 
 Know WHAT it is, and WHY it is we will cover details, fundamental problems, possible alternatives, and mathematical  intuitions behind the established conventions, which unfortunately may not be covered in lectures due to time  constraints. Will be helpful for NLP industry job interviews. 
 Coding Tutorials we plan to have toyish demos or simulators for the concepts covered in lectures e.g. beam-search,  normalizations, as well as how to produce these learning aids with GPT  Claude  DeepSeeks v3  LLama etc.. 
 Assignment Problems we might provide guidance on the current assignment problems andor cover the hard  common  questions discovered during the past assignments. 
 Historical Context of NLP review the major milestones and evolutionary process of core NLP methodologies, as well as  LMs capabilities  industrial focus. 
 Industry News and Insight What industries like OpenAI, Meta, Nvidia, Microsoft, Apple, ByteDance, Baidu, Alibaba are  investigating and deploying. Particularly helpful for jobs seekers, investors, and startup entrepreneurs for NLP-related  directions. 
 Recent State-of-the-Arts NLP literatures extremely fast, and the SOTAs covered in lecture might be outdated next year.  Thus, we might also discuss the most recent research works. 
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 21
Course Project 
 Three options for the course project 
 Option 1 Core NLP 
 Reproduce an existing paper or algorithm, or 
 Propose a new algorithm or model 
 Examples word embedding, tokenization, RAG, hallucination,  multimodal models, foundation models, model distillation... 
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 22
Course Project 
 Three options for the course project 
 Option 2 Applied NLP  Interdisciplinary Project  
 Apply core NLP techniques to solve specific NLP downstream tasks, or  assists research problems from other disciplines. 
 Examples social computing, NLP for social media, digital humanity, story generation, narrative analysis, NLP for politics... 
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 23
Course Project 
 Three options for the course project 
 Option 3 Product  Startup 
 Build something cool, useful, so that it is useful for people, and try your best  to have people buy it.  
 Examples AI Waifu, LLM game engine, real-time translator, customer  service, multi-participant meeting note-taker, product hunter, intelligent  second brain better obsidian... 
 Come to discussion! We might discuss cool ideas there.  
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 24
Course Project - Timeline 
 Team formation 1 Jan 23 Week 3 Thursday 
 Teams should consist of 35 members. We will merge smaller teams.  Project Topic and Proposal 5 Feb 2 Week 4 Sunday  1-2 page excluding references 
 Midway report 10 Feb 20 Week 7 Thursday 
 Final report 24 Mar 20 Final Week Thursday 
 4-6 pages excluding references  
All reports should use NeurIPS template.  The instructions will be released soon.
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 25 
Participation 
 Course participation 10 
 You are encouraged to attend all lectures! 
 Participation will be tracked from the 3rd week for 16 class sessions after the adddrop period  10 points for attending at least 13 lectures you can miss 3 lectures 
 8 for at least 11 lectures 
 5 for at least 8 lectures 
 0 for attending less than 8 lectures 
 We also encourage you to attend discussion sessions and you can earn 3 extra credits on the total  grade by attending 7 or more! 
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 26
Prerequisites  
 We would expect you to have decent foundations in probability and  statistics CSE 103 or equivalence, and strongly recommend background  with linear algebra, deep learning, andor machine learning.  
 You're also expected to develop the ability to program comfortably with  Python and using PyTorch through the course. We will have tutorial  sessions for these. 
 If you're unsure about whether your background prepare you well in the  class, please consult the course staff during the first week of the class. We  are here to help  
Some great tutorial notebooks available online Stanford CS224N, UW CS447517
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 27 
Academic Integrity 
 Students should follow their responsibilities listed in the CSE Academic  Integrity Agreement 
 Students are expected to not consulting online solutions or  
implementations, or engaging in unauthorized collaboration with peers on  the course project.  
 We may use automated systems to detect overly similar submissions, and  any suspected violations of academic integrity will be addressed in line  with UCSD's academic integrity policies. 
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 28
Generative AI Policy 
 You may use generative AI tools such as ChatGPT in the same manner as  you would consult a human collaborator. This means you are not allowed  to directly request answers or copy solutions from these tools.  
 You must also acknowledge the use of generative AI by specifying it as a  collaborator and providing a brief explanation of its use.  
 Any substantial use of generative AI tools, such as directly copying its  generated content, is strictly prohibited and will be considered as a  violation of academic integrity. 
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 29
Accommodations and Inclusion 
 Accommodations 
 If you have a disability and have received an accommodations letter from the Office for  Students with Disabilities OSD, we encourage you to discuss your accommodations and  needs with the course staff at the beginning of the quarter. We are committed to working  with you to ensure that the necessary accommodations are provided. 
 All students welcome 
 We are committed to promoting equity and creating an inclusive learning environment at  UCSD. We also deeply value the diverse identities, backgrounds, and experiences of all  participants. We understand that there might be instances where we fall short. If you  recognize any of these, please feel free to reach out to the course staff. Your feedback is  crucial to our ongoing efforts on fostering a more supportive and equitable learning  environment! 
Statistical NLP - CSE 156 30
The Era of LLMs 31
 Large language models LLMs are large scale neural networks that are pre-trained  on vast amounts of text data. 
 They can potentially perform a wide range  of language tasks such as recognizing,  summarizing, translating, predicting,  classifying, and generating texts. 
 LLMs are built with the Transformer architecture. 
 From several millions to hundreds of  billions of parameters. 
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
History of NLP Research 
httpsarxiv.orgabs2310.07715 
32
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Bloom of NLP with LLMs 
33
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Bloom of NLP with LLMs 34

Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Why are LLMs revolutionary? 
Enabled seemingly impossible possibilities 
 Generate texts beyond average human writing ability 
 Demonstrate human-like complex reasoning  understanding patterns 
 Versatile on many language tasks altogether 
 Unprecedented crossover with society  other fields 
 Sparks of AGI 
  
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 35 Lecture 1 Introduction
Text Generation  Automation 
 Conversation 
 Recommendation letter 
 Poetry 
 Essay 
 Translation 
 Scientific paper 
 News article 
 Email 
 Murder mystery story 
 Shopping list 
  
36
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Code Generation  Debugging 
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 37 Lecture 1 Introduction
LLM-Powered Search Engine 

Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 38 Lecture 1 Introduction
LLM-Powered Intelligent Agents 
39
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
LLMs for Scientific Discovery 
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 40 Lecture 1 Introduction
LLMs for Medical Research  Diagnoses Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 41 Lecture 1 Introduction
LLMs for Law  Legal Usages 
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 42 Lecture 1 Introduction
Vision 
Language  
Applications 
 Google collage  
by The Verge 
43
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Vision-Language Applications 
More fictional images! 
An expressive oil painting of a  
basketball player dunking,  
depicted as an explosion of a  
nebula.  DALLE 3 
44
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Vision-Language Applications 
Complex fictional scenes that  
demand a profound grasp of the  
language context. 

 DALLE 3 
45
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
OpenAI O1  the strongest reasoning model 
OpenAI In our tests, the next model  
update performs similarly to PhD  
students on challenging benchmark  
tasks in physics, chemistry, and biology. 
For the International Mathematics  
Olympiad IMO, the reasoning model  
scored 83. Their coding abilities were  
evaluated in contests and reached the  
89 in Codeforces competitions. 
46
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Surprising Failure Modes of LLMs 
47
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Generative AI Paradox 


Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 48 Lecture 1 Introduction
Weird Conversations 

Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 49 Lecture 1 Introduction
Hallucination 

httpsgithub.comgiuven95chatgpt-failures 
50
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Privacy and Security Risks 
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 51 Lecture 1 Introduction
Scientific Claims Fabrication 

52
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Intellectual Property Infringement Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 53 Lecture 1 Introduction
Topics to Cover in This Course 
Basics of Large Language Models 
Language Models Transformers, Attention, Pre 
training 
World Model Video Generation, Game simulator,  
Agent 
Prompting CoT, Role Play, Tool Use, Prompt Search,  
Structural Prompting 
54
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Topics to Cover in This Course 
Making Better Language Models 
Natural Language Generation NLG Formalization,  
Decoding Algorithms, Training NLG, Evaluating NLG  
Automatic and Human 
Alignment RL Basics, RLHF for LMs, Instruction  
Learning, Data Collection for RL, PPODPO,  
Emergent Capabilities In-context Learning, Scaling  
Laws, Emergent Capabilities, Reasoning,  
55
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Topics to Cover in This Course Making Better Language Models 
Multi-modality Vision-Language Understanding,  
CLIP, Visual Instruction-Tuning with LLMs, Text to  
Image Generation, Embodiment, Robotics,  
Retrieval Retrieval-based LMs Architecture, Training,  
Applications, Promises and Challenges Retrieval 
httpai.stanford.edublogretrieval-based-NLP 
Augmented Generation Parametric and Non Parametric Memories,  
56
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Many forms of LLM Reasoning
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 57 Lecture 1 Introduction 
LLM Reasoning in Science
Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 58 Lecture 1 Introduction 
Learning Goals of the Course  
Whats youll gain by the end of the class? 
 A decent understanding of basic conceptual and technical details of the building  blocks of frontier LLMs. 
 A close understanding of the promises and limits of the abilities of existing frontier  LLMs. 
 A clearer picture of the cutting-edge NLP research areas, and scientific impact of LLMs. Natural Language Processing - CSE 156 59 Lecture 1 Introduction
Thank you! 60
